Add documentation for third-party upload providers for Strapi Cloud (#1842)
strapi/documentation: docusaurus/docs/cloud/advanced/email.md

---
title: Email Provider
displayed_sidebar: cloudSidebar
description: Configure Strapi Cloud to use a third-party email provider.
canonicalUrl: https://docs.strapi.io/cloud/advanced/email.html
---

# Email Provider

Strapi Cloud comes with a basic email provider out of the box. However, you can also configure it to utilize a third-party email provider, if needed.

:::prerequisites

- A local Strapi project running on `v4.8.2+`.
- Credentials for a third-party email provider (see [Strapi Market](https://market.strapi.io/)).

:::

## Configuration
To configure a third-party email provider, in your Strapi project, create a `./config/env/production/plugins.js` or `./config/env/production/plugins.ts` file with the following content:

> ```js

Reviewer: We should provide example files for both JS and TS here as they will be slightly different

module.exports = ({ env }) => ({
  // ...

>   Required Email Provider Plugin Configuration

Reviewer 2: I'd suggest we replace the whole block and its introduction sentence (lines 20-28) with the following:

> To configure a 3rd-party email provider in your Strapi project, create or edit the plugins configuration file for your production environment `./config/env/production/plugins.js|ts` by adding email configuration options as follows:

```js title="./config/env/production/plugins.js"
module.exports = ({ env }) => ({
// … some unrelated plugins configuration options
// highlight-start
email: {
   config: {
      // … provider-specific email configuration options go here
   }
// highlight-end
// … some other unrelated plugins configuration options
)}

FYI, the `highlight-start` and `highlight-end` comments won't show up on the website and are [one of the ways to highlight specific lines](https://docusaurus.io/docs/markdown-features/code-blocks#line-highlighting) in code examples with Docusaurus. 😊 

As mentioned by other reviewers, it'd actually be nice to provide both JavaScript and TypeScript examples, even if they only slightly differ (`export default ({ env }) => ({` in TS instead of module.exports).

When you'll create JS/TS tabs, please ensure that you name the `groupId` `js-ts` so these tabs sync with all other pages on the website. Here's an example (with nested tabs): https://github.com/strapi/documentation/edit/main/docusaurus/docs/dev-docs/configurations/server.md.

  // ...
});
```
Each provider will have different configuration settings available. Review the respective entry for that provider in the [Marketplace](https://market.strapi.io/).

Below are example configurations for the Email plugins.

> <Tabs groupId="email-examples" >

Reviewer 3: In the examples, you can add a title to precise the name of the file where the content should be. We do that in most examples in the Dev Docs, I think it could be nice to do the same here as well 😊 [Here's an example](https://docs.strapi.io/dev-docs/configurations/database#configuration-examples) and [here's the part of the style guide that explains how to add a title](https://www.notion.so/strapi/Strapi-Documentation-Style-Guide-b9c21387732741ed8b0a3f9701612577?pvs=4#4f6204d506de4329810d5e3e1a45040d).

Reviewer 3: It's also possible to add another level of tabs to have one for JS and one for TS. @pwizla Do you usually use the JS/TS subtabs in the examples or in the config code block?

Reviewer 2: Great idea about titles and sub-tabs, Mégane. Please see my comment above for more details, Kellen.

  // ...
  email: {
    config: {
      provider: 'amazon-ses',
      providerOptions: {
        key: env('AWS_SES_KEY'),
        secret: env('AWS_SES_SECRET'),
        amazon: 'https://email.us-east-1.amazonaws.com',
      },
      settings: {
        defaultFrom: 'myemail@protonmail.com',
        defaultReplyTo: 'myemail@protonmail.com',
      },
    },
  },
  // ...
});
```
</TabItem>
<TabItem value="mailgun" label="Mailgun">

```js
module.exports = ({ env }) => ({
  // ...
  email: {
    config: {
      provider: 'mailgun',
      providerOptions: {
        key: env('MAILGUN_API_KEY'), // Required
        domain: env('MAILGUN_DOMAIN'), // Required
        url: env('MAILGUN_URL', 'https://api.mailgun.net'), //Optional. If domain region is Europe use 'https://api.eu.mailgun.net'
      },
      settings: {
        defaultFrom: 'myemail@protonmail.com',
        defaultReplyTo: 'myemail@protonmail.com',
      },
    },
  },
  // ...
});
```
</TabItem>
</Tabs>

:::caution
The email provider must be installed as a package dependency in your Strapi project. For example, to use the Sendgrid email provider, install the `@strapi/provider-email-sendgrid` package.

> :::

Reviewer 3: It could be a bit confusing that this step should be done at the beginning of the configuration but is only mentioned at the end of the section (if I understood well) 🤔 

Maybe we could reorganise a bit so that the configuration steps are in the right order: 
1. Install package dependency
2. Create plugins.js or plugins.ts file with the right content
3. Configure available settings (refer to Marketplace)
What do you think? 😊

## Strapi Cloud Configuration
Before pushing changes to GitHub, add environment variables to the Strapi Cloud project:

1.  Log into Strapi Cloud and click on the corresponding project on the Projects page.
2.  Click on the **Settings** tab and choose **Variables** in the left menu.
3.  Add the required environment variables specific to the email provider.
4.  Click **Save**.

> ### Mailgun Example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Example:**
```
No need for a title here. Also, question: why is there only a MailGun example here when in the previous section there were examples of Sendgrid and Amazon SES as well? 😊

| Variable | Value |
| -------- | ----- |
| `MAILGUN_API_KEY` | your_mailgun_api_key |
| `MAILGUN_DOMAIN` | your_mailgun_domain |
| `MAILGUN_URL` | your_mailgun_url |

## Deployment

To deploy the project and utilize the third-party email provider, push the changes from earlier. This will trigger a rebuild and new deployment of the Strapi Cloud project.

Once the application finishes building, the project will use the new email provider.

> :::strapi
> For information on creating a custom email provider, see the [Providers](/dev-docs/providers#creating-providers) documentation.
> :::

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
:::strapi Custom provider
If you want to create a custom email provider, please refer to the [Providers](/dev-docs/providers#creating-providers) documentation in the Developer Documentation.
:::
```
Suggestion to add a title and rephrase for a friendlier callout content 😊
